.TH GTANGLE 1 "2026-06-21" "GWEB" "GWEB Manual"
.SH NAME
gtangle \- extract compilable Go source from a GWEB literate program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gtangle
.RB [ \-o
.IR dir ]
.RB [ \-line ]
.IR file [ .w ]
.RI [ change [ .ch ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gtangle
is the
.I tangle
half of GWEB, a literate\-programming system for Go modeled on CWEB. It reads a
GWEB source file
.RI ( .w ),
expands the named\-section references in program order, runs
.BR gofmt (1)
on the result, and writes the Go source the compiler needs. It is the Go
analogue of CWEB's
.BR ctangle (1).
.PP
The unnamed
.B @c
sections become the program text, written to the input's base name with a
.B .go
extension. Sections introduced with
.BI @( file @>=
are written to their own named files instead, so one web can emit several
files (and a
.BR go.mod ).
.PP
The
.B .w
extension may be omitted:
.B gtangle wc
reads
.IR wc.w .
An optional second argument names a change file (CWEB's
.B .ch
mechanism), which patches the master source without editing it; its
.B .ch
extension may likewise be omitted. As it runs,
.B gtangle
prints a brief progress report to standard error, one
.BI * N
per starred (chapter) section.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-o " dir"
Write output files to
.I dir
instead of the input file's directory. The directory (and any subdirectories
named by
.BI @( file @>=
targets) is created if necessary.
.TP
.B \-line
Emit
.B //line
directives in the tangled Go so that the Go compiler,
.BR "go vet" ,
and panic traces report errors at
.B .w
source positions instead of
.B .go
positions \(em the Go counterpart of CWEB's
.BR #line .
Off by default, so ordinary output (and the self\-hosting fixpoint) is unchanged.
.TP
.B \-version
Print the version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Tangle a web to Go:
.PP
.RS
.EX
gtangle wc            # wc.w -> wc.go
.EE
.RE
.PP
Apply a change file:
.PP
.RS
.EX
gtangle wc wc.ch      # wc.w + wc.ch -> wc.go
.EE
.RE
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gweave (1),
.BR gofmt (1),
.BR ctangle (1)
.PP
The GWEB manual and source: <https://github.com/sjnam/gweb>.
.SH AUTHOR
GWEB is maintained by sjnam <https://github.com/sjnam>.
